# Summary notes

## Introduction

Purpose of this book it to improve ability of readers to reason about judgements and choices of others (and their own's). It requires better vocabulary then everyday language supplies. In particular vocabulary describing systematic errors people tend to make - biases.

We tend to believe that we know what happens in our minds, but this is not true in a lot of cases.
This book aim to provide author's current understanding of human's judgment and decision making.

One of recurrent theme of the book is large role of luck (chance) in our lives. Much bigger then normally accepted by common wisdom. ***See: Taleb***

Another important topic is the nature of "experts' intuition" and the difference between true and false expertise when intuition is concerned.

### Book Structure

This book consists of 5 parts:
1. Dedicated to 2 mechanism of human cognition: fast (intuitive) and slow (rational) thinking, called "System 1" and "System 2" in this book respectfully.
1. Dedicated to review of judgement heuristics and difficulty we experience with statistical thinking.
1. Reviews the way we tend to overestimate our knowledge and confidence, as well as underestimation of role of randomness in our lives.
1. Concentrates on behavioral economics and the nature of decision making. As well as introduces "prospect theory".
1. Introduces distinction between "two selves": "the experiencing self" and "remembering self". And implications arising from this.

In addition book includes as appendixes 2 seminal papers published by author and Amos that derived the most of researched covered in this book.


## Part 1. Two Systems
## 1. The Characters of the Story

For several decades psychology is aware of two systems of thinking that humans employ. Adopting wildly used terms proposed by Keith Stanovich and Richard West, this book will call them "System 1" and "System 2". 

To make ideas of this book easier to understand and internalize these systems will be treaded there as a characters. While this is not accurate and considered unacceptable in professional literature, it makes ideas presented in the book way easier to digest.

System 1 is responsible for automatic operations. Some of them are innate (reacting to loud sound, ability to recognize objects), some we learn to do automatically through practice (driving the car on the empty highway). Some we can consciously control (chewing), some we can't (recognizing words in the native language).

System 2 is responsible for conscious logical (algorithmical) thinking. It can follow steps one by one. It requires conscious attention in order to functioning. System 2 operates way slower then System 1 and requires lot of energy to operate.

Attention is good proxy to psychological energy. It is limited resource that is depleted by wide range of activities and relatively slow restores over time. When "energy" is at low System 2 functions suboptimal or shuts down.

The control of attention is shared by both systems. 

We identify our self with System 2, but in reality majority of mental processing is done by System 1.


### Plot synopsis (Interaction between Systems)

The interaction between Systems is optimized to preserve energy. Most of the time we are guided by S1 as on autopilot. S2 is normally on the low-effort mode (on standby). S1 constantly pings S2 with suggestions if something is worthy of S2 attention (impressions, intuitions, intentions, feelings). If S2 doesn't veto them impressions and intuitions become beliefs, and impulses - voluntary actions.

When S1 runs into the situation it can't easily process (unusual situation) it mobilizes S2. We consciously register it as a feeling of surprise.

S2 also continuously monitors our behavior and proactively jumps to actions in the tricky situations (touchy social interactions, high risk situations, like driving in the heavy rain). One of the tasks of S2 is to override impulses from S1, it is responsible for the self-control.

"The division of labor between System 1 and System 2 is highly efficient: it minimizes effort and optimizes performance. The arrangement works well most of the time because System 1 is generally very good at what it does: its models of familiar situations are accurate, its short-term predictions are usually accurate as well, and its initial reactions to challenges are swift and generally appropriate. System 1 has biases, however, systematic errors that it is prone to make in specified circumstances."


### Illusions

Besides visual illusions that are well known there are cognitive illusions that exhibit similar trait, even when we are aware about illusion we still experience it.

"The question that is most often asked about cognitive illusions is whether they can be overcome. The message of these examples is not encouraging. Because System 1 operates automatically and cannot be turned off at will, errors of intuitive thought are often difficult to prevent. Biases cannot always be avoided, because System 2 may have no clue to the error. Even when cues to likely errors are available, errors can be prevented only by the enhanced monitoring and effortful activity of System 2. As a way to live your life, however, continuous vigilance is not necessarily good, and it is certainly impractical. Constantly questioning our own thinking would be impossibly tedious, and System 2 is much too slow and inefficient to serve as a substitute for System 1 in making routine decisions. The best we can do is a compromise: learn to recognize situations in which mistakes are likely and try harder to avoid significant mistakes when the stakes are high. The premise of this book is that it is easier to recognize other people’s mistakes than our own."


